Hey there, welcome to the Posit Data Science Hangout. I'm Libby Heron, and this is a recording
of our weekly community call that happens every Thursday at 12pm US Eastern Time. If
you are not joining us live, you miss out on the amazing chat that's going on. So find
the link in the description where you can add our call to your calendar and come hang
out with the most supportive, friendly, and funny data community you'll ever experience.
Can't wait to see you there. I would love to introduce our featured leader today, Brijesh
Chejerla at Florida Blue. Brijesh, could you introduce yourself? Tell us a little bit about
you and something you like to do for fun.
Hey, everyone. I'm Brijesh Chejerla. I am a data scientist at Blue Cross Blue Shield
of Florida. I have a PhD in computer science. And by way of introduction, I'm an enthusiast
in many things. Data science happens to be one of the conduits to help prosper my enthusiasm
in those many things. Machine learning is at my heart, it's at my core. And I chose
to be a data scientist way back in 2016, because after I graduated from my university with
a PhD, I was like, what do I do with this? And I was thinking about where do I go next?
Because I was pretty particular about what I would do and which field I would be in.
And then I realized being a data scientist, you are a plug and play model. You can be
in different fields. You could be in sports, you can be in medicine, you could be in healthcare,
you could be in construction, you could be whatever. And then they all kind of fit together.
You do very similar stuff. But at the core of that, it's still the machine learning.
So that's kind of the reason why I chose to be a data scientist. And yeah, I'm here. I
graduated from being a data scientist to a machine learning engineer, I would say. But
yeah, that's on the professional side of things. As for fun, I love to watch football, soccer
for American audience. And I spend a lot of time, I would say, going through the analysis
and all of those things, you know. So that's that's kind of my fun activity for the most
part. Generally, I love to listen to podcasts. Most of these podcasts these days are football
related for me, because I'm in that space right now. But then otherwise, so to speak,
I just love to converse with people. You know, that's a fun activity for me.
Well, you are doing that today. And Rory in the chat, I can already see is wondering what team
you support, Prajesh. Manchester United.
Manchester United. Any other ManU fans here? Man City fans unite. We have some other fans. Oh,
no, we have some booing. Rory's a good choice. Rory's a good choice. James says cries in Tottenham.
Please mute everybody who is not a ManU fan.
Amazing. Well, Prajesh, I would love to start with something. I'm going to hop in before the
Slido questions as a breach of protocol and say, I have to ask you about your stint in motorsports,
because I know that your sort of like transition into industry from academia had a pit stop. Oh,
that was an unintended pun. Had a pit stop in motorsports. Could you just give us a little
bit of info on that? I truly didn't mean to do the pit stop pun. Well, that's pretty nice. So
after I graduated, I was searching for jobs, obviously, you know, and then I just didn't want
to work for the sake of working. I was pretty, I wanted to take, spending five, six years in
academia, I really wanted to take a break. So I took my own time to find myself a job. And then
this motorsports job came along as a shot in the arm on a scape. And I had no intention to even
look at motorsports for that matter. I was a, I am still a Formula One fan. I still watch Formula
One. But NASCAR was something that was way out of my radar. So I got this job through a connection,
as in one of my friends recommended me to this job. And then he connected me with the people who
were looking for a data scientist to be hired. And that's how I started working at Hendrick
Motorsports. So that was my first foray into motorsports, first foray into NASCAR, everything
was very new. I was looking at jobs in the Bay Area. And then I had to move over to Charlotte,
North Carolina. And that's how things worked out, you know.
All right. We have some more sports questions. There's an anonymous one already that says,
favorite example of a data science, of data science applied in football or sports in general.
So one thing that most people don't know is that the amount of data that you see on screen,
on TV, is not the same kind of data that people get to work with behind the scenes. Because
NASCAR is basically stock car racing, right? So not all of the teams have the same amount of
funding. So NASCAR as an organization does not allow you to, or it does not give you the data,
because they know that people who have, or teams who have more funding will have,
they'll have some benefit over teams who do not have that kind of funding to kind of, you know,
look at the data and do whatnot with that. So you're restricted with the data that you collect.
So you will have to be, you'll have to get very creative with what you have and solution for it,
because the models that we built when I was working at Hendrick Motorsports were,
it was basically, you know, to be able to predict when the driver should pit, you know, when should
they go into the pit stop. And that is dependent on the fuel consumption, and it's dependent on the
tire degradation. So we had to build models based on that. And then we had to try and see if that
made sense from a machine learning standpoint, because if you're a data scientist, most of
what you do is, let's say, regression. There are many engineers who work at, you know, the company,
who are, who also have used regression and who also know about all of those things. So
your question would then be, do I just use a hacksaw, I mean, a saw to kind of, you know,
break a twig, or do I actually do the bare minimum? So you'll have to be very creative about how you
go about it. So again, for sports, you know, I know for a fact that, you know, football uses a lot of
data science these days. There are people and there are teams that actually try and predict
what the scores could be based on who's playing and the positions that they're playing and, you know,
the recent trends and the form and so on and so forth. You know, how many yards they're able to
cover, after how many minutes does their performance go down and so on and so forth.
And it so happened that for a Manchester United versus Manchester City derby game,
there was an algorithm that predicted that City will win 2-1. And that's exactly what happened
because of the goals ratio and all that. So it was very interesting. And I thought, you know,
that would be something cool. So if you're into that kind of a thing, or if you're looking to get
into that kind of a thing, you should know that, you know, the amount of data that you'd have would
be very limited. And probably, even if you would say, well, let's build up this pipeline in order
to get fetch all of this data, you still won't have that simply because, you know, it just doesn't
either exist, or it's too difficult for you to go through all of the hoops in order to get that kind
of data that you need as a data scientist. And as data scientists, the one thing that we all keep
saying is, oh, we need more data to be able to generalize a model to be able to make better
predictions. And for motorsports, you have to be extremely accurate to the milliseconds level,
right? And at that point of time, you have to think, am I overfitting this model
because it's pretty accurate, or is it generalized enough? Because if it's generalized enough, then
you may not be giving the race engineer or the race crew chief what he wants. But at the same
time, from the data science level, you know, if you don't generalize, you're basically overfitting,
which is not a good model. So you'll have to be very creative and you have to be very specific
about how you want to go about those things. That sounds like a tough problem, but like
relatable across all industries in data science. Am I specific enough? Am I generalizable enough?
Well, we have lots of conversation going on in the chat about different people supporting
different teams. Somebody wanted to call out that Man City is different than Man United. You're a
Man United fan, right? We have some Man City fans. Everybody is very interested in the sports stuff.
So I wonder if we could do one more sports question and then shift gears because I have
another question for you. So the other question that was in there was also anonymous and it was,
would you be able to provide some resources for people who are interested in machine learning
and football? If you have any tips. It's okay if you don't. Yeah, I don't think, to my knowledge,
I don't think there's anything that is resourceful enough for machine learning and football together.
Because at the end of the day, you're applying a solution, a mathematical solution to an existing
problem or to a real world use case, which has some data. So it's that connection, which is why
I said during my introduction that I wanted to see if being a data scientist, I can plug and play.
Can I go into finance? Can I go into more sports? Can I go into healthcare? Can I go into whatever?
And will I be doing very similar stuff? Because then I would make myself the most useful. Because
let's say if I get bored doing the same thing for three years, I'd probably jump and do the
same thing. So I wouldn't say look at it as a connected set of things. Just there are a,
there is a ton of resource. There are a ton of, tons of resources out there for machine learning.
I actually shared a book if anybody wants to go look at it for sports analytics.
Yeah. I always say that, you know, keep to the basics of machine learning, keep to the basics
of statistics that will serve you no matter what you do, no matter where you go. And then.
Go right ahead.
And then, you know, you can apply that to anything. You know, you could, you could look at
different types of regression. You'll see, depending on the data that you get, no matter how
the data that what kind of data you have, if you're building models, it's one thing. Data
scientists also do analysis analysis. You have to have very strong statistical background,
right? So you have to develop that. You have to understand how to look at this. You have to look at,
you have to look at design of experiments. You have to understand that you have to, you know,
create hypothesis. You have to, you have to look at when it comes to the world of data,
it's an elephant and everybody is looking at the trunk of an elephant or the leg of an elephant,
kind of know that it's supposed to be an elephant. And when you draw it, it generalizes to an
elephant, but it's not exactly the same elephant that everybody looks at. That's what data is.
So I would just say approach the bottom up.
Approach the, your approach should be bottom up. Whereas, you know, your,
your foundational machine learning, your foundational mathematics,
your foundational statistics are very strong so that it can be applicable to any data that's given
to you. I was going to say, you know, that is a fantastic lead in to our next question,
oh, which is gone. Hold on a second. It disappeared from Slido. I think Rachel and
I probably clicked something in the exact same moment. I think someone maybe with their question.
Okay. So Rob Creel had asked a question. Rob, if you are available to ask it live,
that would be amazing. I'm going to highlight it in Slido.
Yeah, thank you. So I share your perspective on the general applicability of data science and that
being appealing, but like my background is in mathematics itself, just a master's in pure math.
And like I, something I've struggled with has been like, how do you pick an industry?
Like in my job applications, I've worried that I've been casting too wide an eye on
the net. And I almost wish I had like one specific industry that was just my favorite
and I can target. So I just love to hear about your experience. Did you sort of just
somewhat accidentally land where you are or was it targeted and how did you choose your targeting?
No, great question, actually. So I don't think I did a good enough job trying to explain how I
got to where I got to as part of my introduction. So I'll use that for now. So the way I started
looking at it was two things. One is how much money am I getting? And two, how much of my
personal ethics and morals do I have to forego for that kind of money, right? Those were my two
parameters. So like any company that you go and work for, any industry that you go and work for,
you will have to compromise on certain things because that's the, you know, that's how the
world works. So I say, just pick on those two things and think, you know, what your financial
status is and, you know, how strongly do you feel about certain things? The reason I picked
motorsports was because there were no ethical or moral dilemmas for that for me. And two,
it was something that excited me, right? So that's kind of how I picked that off all of the other
options that I had, because in Bay Area, you can actually go and work for different companies,
you know, and some of the big companies and all that. And I just wasn't really sure if I wanted
to get into that. Coming off a PhD, the first, I was extremely idealistic. So I would say, do not
be idealistic. You know, if anything, don't be that. Be more pragmatic about where, you know,
and where to work and what to do and stuff like that. So that's one thing that I would say,
because the first three to six months, I struggled, because I thought, you're supposed to do it this
way. And the business doesn't really care how you do it, as long as you get it done in a certain
time frame, and you give them similar outputs that you're expecting, you know. So that's another
perspective that I would say, you know, you would have to develop or think about if, you know, you
want to even develop for that matter. And then pick and choose a couple, like, for instance,
healthcare. Healthcare is going to be a field where data science, machine learning, artificial
intelligence, whatever, whatnot, you know, let's say, if you're even a programmer, for that matter,
you're going to be in that space and find yourself good enough jobs for the most part,
you know. And unless you're working for some seriously shady companies, I don't want to name
them. Unless you're working for some seriously shady companies, for the most part, you know,
you'll actually do a pretty good job, because most of what you do in IT or data science is
technically be helping the member or, you know, the patient or whoever as well, you know.
I don't think it will be in your capacity to choose how the member is actually affected,
because that's, you know, beyond you, because it's then to the outreach managers and how they
use the models that you build and stuff like that. That's one thing that I'd say, you know, so
be sure that no matter how hard you try, unless you are at a very high level,
you can only influence it so much. So, you know, even the analysis that you do, you can do a fair
and thorough analysis and stuff like that, but that will be the end of what you can actually influence.
Because I'm in healthcare, and I can give you that example right now. If you want to work for,
let's say, a company like Spotify, you know, who does these recommendation based stuff,
there's nothing wrong with that, you know, there are no moral or ethical obligations for you to
think about very seriously, unless you seriously have some concentrations against it. So think
about it from that perspective, and choose whoever gives you money, make sure that you get more money,
I would say, no doubt about that. But at the same time, unless you get into it, and you start working
you won't really be able to crystallize all of what you actually want to do, you know, but so
get yourself into it. I got myself into it as a data scientist. I want, I grew into being an
architect, then I was an admin, you know, I was a positive admin for some time, for about six years.
I wanted to think if I were my own leader, if I were, there's a book called Think Like a CEO,
right? So if you were on your own leader, and you as a developer, would you look up to your
leader who has knowledge about most of these things, but then also has a vision, because as
leaders, you expect to have a vision, or would you want to just look at yourself as just an
independent contributor, where you're very happy doing just model building, and then, you know,
take your paycheck home, and then you're happy with it. So think of those things, and then go
both deep and across, you know, both vertical and across. Develop new perspectives, because once
you become an architect, or once you not become, once you think like an architect, once you do
system design, once you get into data engineering, your perspective about data science will change.
I have done that. I have consciously trained myself to think like that. So I would encourage
you to, you know, look into that perspective, but no matter what, pick a, you know, look at
those two things, pick a job, get into it, and then explore your options, is what I'd say.
Fantastic. Okay, well, we have a question that is from Mark, and I'm going to put it in the chat
here. Mark, if you are available to ask that live, that would be great. Let's see if we can find Mark.
Can you hear me? Hey, yep. Yeah. Hi, Brijesh. My question is, like, in your role right now, like,
what is the most commonly used ML technique that, you know, that answers a problem almost, like,
you know, more often than it, than you expect? And my follow-up question to that is, like,
where does deep learning and, you know, AI, LLMs come into play in your day-to-day?
Mark, you're, you're the same map of what's at Florida, right?
Are you not? Yes, yes, I am. Yeah, like, yeah, yeah, we work together.
Mark, my colleague, my friends. So, so, yeah, I think if you ask me this question in 2017,
the default answer that everybody knows is XGBoost. Throw anything at XGBoost, it'll do well,
or well enough. But I would say start looking at, don't, don't look at
using an algorithm as it is, you know. You have to look at your data, you have to understand your
data, and then think of which algorithm use, you know, works best. So, you'll have to build
your data in order to use your algorithm, right? So, there, the most commonly used one, again,
is XGBoost because it works extremely well because of how robustly built it is, or what kind
of, how, how much of a robust algorithm it is. But then if you think about it, right, it only goes
to solve for so many things, and it's extremely rectangular in its format, there are limitations
to that. And if you want to know the causality of why something is happening at a role level,
and you want to say, okay, this particular person in these, you know, the top decile,
or the top 1% of the people give me the reasons why, and I want to reach out to them x, y, and z.
If they happen to be more nuanced, then that's when you go into deep learning. Because then
the way you structure your inputs to the model will change. So, you'll, you'll then start using
transformer-based, or attention-based models, or you could probably develop something from
LSTM-based solutions, or you could think of, you know, states-based solutions, and stuff like that.
So, you'll have to start thinking of the problems, and see how you can structure the data in order to
get the output that your business partner is looking for. So, if the business partner says,
yeah, all of these members are fine, but then what about these reasons? If you tell, can you tell me
why does this happen? If data points are correlated, or if data points are, okay, when I say data
points, if certain events are related to certain other events, which are not to be looked at in
isolation, you will then have to construct your data so that those two events are together, and
the model understands that in context, and gives the output, at which point of time you would have
to use deep learning. So, it's, it's about how the, when you talk to the business, and the business
tells you these are my parameters that I want to look for, there is an ideal state where the business
says, I want all of these things, but then there is a more practical state where you can get to
an approximation of that ideal state. So, you'll have to pick and choose your algorithm based on
that, is what I'd say. I hope that answers your question. I'm sure it does, and Mark, thank you so
much for asking that fantastic question. Well, we had lots and lots of chatter going on in the chat
about systems design, about architecture, adminning, and you mentioned that you were a
Posit admin for many, many years, but you were also a practicing data scientist. I think that
there are probably many people who have that same experience. So, I would love to ask you at our
kind of halfway mark here, a tool-based question. So, what tools do your teams use? Are you in R?
Are you in Python? Are you working? Are you deploying things in Connect? What is your
experience as that sort of half-and-half admin and practitioner? So, our tech stack for data science
machine learning at Florida Blue is Posit Workbench, Posit Connect. So, we develop in
Posit Workbench, we deploy in Posit Connect. I was a reluctant admin to begin with because I
didn't know anything about it, honestly speaking, but then I'm glad I got into it because being an
admin changes the way you look at how you want to deploy stuff, how you want to make your
models available. So, that helps you architect your solutions better. That helps you become a
better solutions architect for that matter. So, it's a connected set of events, you know,
depending on what you want to do. Now, I think we had around 150 developers and about
800 to 1,000 consumers of the content. Whoa, whoa. Say that one more time. You had how many?
800 to 1,000 consumers of the content. That's the license that we have for it.
And about 150 active developers and increasing. The last I checked was 150. I don't know if that's
gone more. That's a record. I think that's the highest I've heard. So, what I did was,
and then, you know, we kind of used to work in silos and then people, we would get emails back
and forth saying, okay, this is not working, that is not working, this is the thing, that is the
thing, blah, blah, blah, blah. So, what we did was we just created a Teams channel and said,
if you have any questions, post it here. And if somebody else also knows the answer to that,
go ahead. So, what we did was we then have a set of packages that are internally developed
to our own needs that we use. And those are specifically used on the Posit platform,
you know, like, you know, to connect to databases, to deploy, and to do all of these things.
So, that's kind of how it started. And then it's at full maturity right now. We are looking to move
from on-prem, our solutions are basically on, sorry, our applications are basically on-prem.
And we are now looking to move into cloud. So, the cloud that we're looking to move to,
we'll now have to start thinking about how to set these things up, how will a session spawn
for a person. So, it's not, because it's a server, right? Like Workbench and Connect are on the
servers and multiple users use it. So, you'll have dependencies and all of those things. So,
all of those things need to be figured out. You will then understand and appreciate how
difficult it is and how important it is for you to look at authentication or user authentication
and how that affects the way you work and stuff like that. I keep saying this all the time.
If I had a DevOps team, I as a developer would just want to wake up in the morning,
make my coffee, sit, just turn on my computer and log in and then just get away, you know?
So, when I was the admin, that's kind of what I wanted to provide to our users
so that they have least amount of friction to do the stuff that they wanted to do. But at the same
time, that was a lot of work for me outside of my data science day-to-day work. So, it's an
interesting thing. So, if you ever want to get into admin, you have to learn Linux. You have to
learn how that works. You have to understand how to solution some things from a security perspective,
which is, again, a different difficult thing depending on the figure that you're in. So,
in healthcare, security is paramount, right? So, you have to be extremely specific. Users don't,
especially data scientists and analysts, they aren't necessarily software developers. So,
you don't go through the STLC process all the time. So, you'll have to guide them through
those things. So, that got me into the security. That got me into being a cyber secure software
developer hack. And so, that's kind of how my journey grew. So, if you're interested in that,
I would very strongly encourage that you get into that. It helps. It helps you become an
all-around person for that matter. **Sameera Kapila):
Fantastic. Okay. Well, we will move on from admin questions in just one second,
but I know that Rachel has one because she mentioned it earlier.
**Rachel Hansen** Yeah, it seems like people want to write a book called The Reluctant Admin
as well. But I was wondering, how did you so successfully transfer that IT admin ownership
over, especially with so many people being reliant on the tools? Like, what was that
transition like? **Sameera Kapila**
So, the transition period was not easy, honestly, if I'm being very honest. It's not easy, you know?
So, POSIT admin is a very niche-specific admin role. It's not your general systems admin. It's
not your general Hadoop admin. It's not your general Linux admin. You need to have the
knowledge of all three of them, and you need to know how POSIT workbench works. You need to know
how the config files are set up. You need to know how POSIT is set up or is expected to be set up.
You need to know all of those things, and then you need to know the connect side of things as
well. And being a POSIT admin also comes with, hey, I have these R-related questions. Can you
help me? I have these Python-related questions. Can you help me? So, I'm not a R person. I've
never tried to be an R person. I would just say I'm literate at R. So, any of my R questions,
I kind of diverted to my teammates who are experts in R. Any of the Python-related questions, I
handle. So, it's a very niche kind of role where you have to be extremely good at many things at
the same time. So, the new admins who have come in, they came from not this kind of background.
They weren't R developers. They weren't Python developers. So, it took us a while. So, we kind
of developed an internal mechanism where it made it easier for them to kind of know what sort of
issues that come up. So, what we did was we have a Git issues and we created a dashboard of,
you know, a Git board. And then, basically, if you're a new admin, you can search for an issue
and that issue will have been resolved somewhere. And then, you know, if, let's say, I didn't exist
in this company tomorrow, you can actually look at how that issue was resolved and then go about
resolving that issue. That's kind of how we designed it and set it up. That's helped our
new admins. We still continue to help new admins if, you know, there are Kerberos issues or
something of that sort, right? And if they have any questions or whatever. And we still sometimes
do get on the calls for, hey, we're going to set these things up in cloud. You know, what do we
need to look at? Or, you know, do you have a few use cases that we need to look into and stuff like
that? So, that's kind of how we evolved. It's taken about six months, I would say. It's not
super easy. So, it's going to take time. Yeah. Thank you. It sounds like there's a
great relationship, though, between data science and IT at the company.
So, at our company, we are in the IT wing. There are other data scientists across as well. So,
there is a data science for different business areas. We were, I think, 10 years ago or whenever
the enterprise data science team. So, we stuck in IT. That's where we've been.
Wow. Okay. We have so many questions in Slido. Let's see if we can spend the next 10 minutes
getting through as many as we can. Makarand had asked a question in the Slido. And let's
see if we can find Makarand to unmute. Yeah, I'm unmuted. Hi. I'm there.
There. Hey. Would you like to ask your question live?
Sure. Hi. This is Makarand here. I am in California Bay Area.
You know, with AI, this question is pertinent to a lot of us. How do you think AI is going to
impact data science roles? I personally see a huge impact already and can speak more to it.
And then, you know, do you use AI as a productivity tool in your day-to-day? And if so, how?
Yeah. Very pertinent question. So, yes, AI is going to impact not just data science. AI is
going to impact even software development for that matter. AI is going to impact to a reasonable
degree now architecture in the future. Probably, you know, that's where we're going to go.
I think the only safe stream right now is data engineering. So, if you are a good data engineer
and, you know, you're worth your salt, then you're safe for now is what I would say.
But as for data science, right, yeah, it's definitely going to affect because I have seen…
I'm pretty sure most of us have seen that, you know, you throw a CSV, let's say, at the model
and you ask it questions, it's going to generate X, Y, and Z. If you are a Pandas user, you know
that Pandas AI is a package that you can actually load to just ask it questions, you know. So,
it just depends on how it's being used. I don't… California is a different bubble in itself
altogether. So, outside of California, all of the other companies are still trying to get up to
speed with this. In many companies like ours, there are a lot of, you know, compliance and
regulatory issues that we have to overcome before we start doing all of these things
because of where the data sits and where it goes and what you can ask and
what is quote-unquote touched by AI. CMS defines… CMS doesn't define it adequately,
but it says touched by AI or use AI. So, now AI could be NLP, could be, you know, your language
models, could be anything. So, if it's generated by AI, it's actually generated by the language
model or is it just an extraction? It's not very adequately defined. So, for now, it's okay,
but then very soon, there's going to come a place where many of the jobs are going to be redundant
because you can then do more with less. Now, but that also means that you're not necessarily going
to get more productive. It means that you're going to have to work on a lot of things because
the assumption is that, hey, you don't now have to write the code that you otherwise previously
would have to. So, those assumptions are changing. I am seeing that in multiple organizations,
you know, the whole idea of trying… For instance, we have a AI coding agent,
like we have Windsurf, you know, this thing, you know, as part of the organization. So,
many people use that. I use it to… So, I set up a few things so that I use it for
code review, you know. It helps me review the code much faster because with all of the other
things that I do, I won't have enough time to actually do enough, like, detailed code review.
So, I ask it to do X, Y, and Z, and it comes back with whatever. But then I still rely on my own
know-how to actually go and look at the logic that's actually written for the business. It's
not just about the correctness. It's also about, is the business logic correct? Are you reading
the right kind of columns? Are you reading the right kind of… This thing, are you doing the
right kind of transmissions? Does it make… What… The transmission that you do, is it
clinically relevant? All of those things, I don't think AI can do yet, you know. So,
but for most of the things, you can check for code correctness, you can check for,
you know, you can write quickly tests and stuff like that. So, that's where I see it useful.
But in terms of impact, in what we do from a exploratory data analysis,
Exploratory Data Analysis. The good part is we can do that EDA, initial EDA much faster,
but at the same time, there will come a point of time where all of this will become
agentic and then it'll just run a model and do X, Y, and Z.
You have to think of a solution, put in your inputs in a certain way, and think of your
outputs in a certain way, and then you can write code and stuff like that. But if you're expecting
it to do the auto ML part, it's not there yet. Maybe it will be, maybe somebody will, you know,
decide to build an agent solution out there, which does that, and that will change the game.
I don't know. But yeah, it's definitely going to affect. But in order for you to hedge yourself
against that risk, I would still say, be fundamentally thorough in your machine learning,
deep learning, statistics, mathematics, whatever you have it, you know, and then coding is kind of
out of our hands. You know, you tell people I'm a better coder than a coding agent right now.
It's a hard thing to prove these days. But you can always still say that I'm a much better data
scientist, or I'm a much better machine learning engineer than a coding agent or, you know,
the AI can do right now. And you would still get away with that, and people will trust you.
Awesome. Thanks, Rajesh. Thank you, Makarand, for that question. And I wanted to call out that
there's a huge conversation happening in the chat, including Makarand talking about systems design
versus ad hoc work, which is really, really interesting. Makarand, I'm going to have to
like reach out so that we can talk more about this. Maybe you can come on the Hangout with us
and talk about it as well, because it's a fantastic topic, like this balance between
rigor and speed that we see in business, especially as academic thinkers, where the
business is always going to need these like quick turnarounds. Anyway, everybody go look at that
conversation and chime in, and we will head over to another question in Slido. Oh, go ahead,
Rajesh. Before that, if I may, about the system design. So the way we look at it here is, you know,
it's not just about data science models that you build. So we also build up the applications in
our team, right? So that brings in itself its own level of system design that you'll have to think
about. You'll have to understand what works, what doesn't work. That's another part where
AI kind of falls short, because you are the one who has to think about you. There's practically
no way for the AI to be cognizant of all of the existing stuff that's going on in your organization
and how things are set up and all of those things. So your system design is basically your architecture
at the end of the day. Any architect's fundamental thing is system design. So for you to be able to
know that, you have to be very cognizant of that. So when you build your systems out,
that's what I mean to say, you know, when you architect your solution, it's not just about
which algorithm I use or how I input the data. It's about how many users are going to use it. How
am I going to connect it to different things? How am I going to fetch from this database at
whatever pace? Is it going to be given to me in a stream? Is it going to be given to me in a batch?
Is it going to be given to me in a JSON format? Is it just going to be a row by row fetch?
All of those things you'll have to think about when you build your model, because your model
outputs are going to then be dependent on the speed at which your system integrates.
So system design is definitely something that's a must for most machine learning engineers.
So yeah, be relevant. Fantastic. We definitely had some other systems design questions in there.
The Slido is just so full of questions. We will never be able to get to all of them because we
have 15 minutes left. But I would love to bring in Logan to ask his question live, because it
definitely fits into the sort of vibe of today, generalizing our work experience to other things
and being a plug and play mindset with your data science. So Logan, if you are available to ask
yours live. Yeah. That would be. Hey, Logan. How's it going? It's all right. I wanted to ask,
I'm a little young in my career as a data scientist. So I wanted to ask, it seems like
you've switched a lot of careers where data is vastly different. The systems that you're using
are vastly different. And as data scientists, we're expected to know, be the experts on our
systems and data. How do you quickly become an expert on the, when you walk into a new job,
how do you quickly become the data expert? I don't think there's any such thing as quickly
becoming a data expert. So the way I grew into my role is I, so if this is a funnel, I'd say here,
if this is a funnel here is where data scientists usually operate. And I'd say, stop just being
here. This is a local minima for you. Just don't be here. Which is why I say, if you think like
a architect system design comes into the picture, you have to know where your data exists, what's
your data pipeline. So depending on whichever company that you work for, try and get to know
the data pipeline. If you don't have restrictions to know that data pipeline or to access that
thing, that's a different issue. And it makes it much easier, but get to know that, where all of
the data is flowing into, what kind of data does my company get in? If you want to call it a data
lake, what flows into the data lake and outside of the data lake, what kind of pipelines are built
to go into relational databases or NoSQL kind of setting, or am I just feeding into flat files or
am I, if you work in industries where there are images or audio files and stuff like that.
And then you'll have to start thinking about, if I have to collect more features for whatever
data science work that I'm doing, can I extract features only from this relational database or
from NoSQL, or can I also go above and beyond and say, you know what, from this particular
WAV file, I can actually transcribe this document, this audio file, and then do some NLP on top of
that, or basically if you're using a language model to be able to summarize or to extract,
can I get more data points out of that? Is this information available? That is kind of how you
have to think, because you should never stop yourself in this here. You also have to
think about a data engineer. You have to think about, okay, but if I have to connect these two
different databases, how do I go about connecting them? Am I writing the most optimal SQL?
And then once you connect different databases, you'll try and say, oh, these have these many other
fields that I didn't know. You'll have to spend time visually looking at all of the different
fields and see if it's useful to you or not. You'll have to be very curious and asking
same question as to what does this mean? What does that mean? And then most importantly,
I would say you'll have to think like the business or like your end user. If you were
a recipient of the analysis that you were given, what would you want or what else do you want?
How deep would you want to go? And so that's kind of how you have to switch your thinking.
So your data science, with all of the machine learning and the statistics background that you
must have learned in your school, or even when you're in your job that you're learning, that
you're being an architect or a system designer, and then being a vertical data engineer is
fundamental to being a good machine learning stack. Then if you want to add yourself another
vertical, which is DevOps, that's great. It's not necessarily going to build you with anything,
but let's say if you want to become the CTO of a company, you will have that thought process
where you say, I want you to do X, Y, and Z and think about this. I want to solution this and so
on and so forth. So that's kind of how I would say grow into your career in that perspective and not
just limit yourself to just being, I was given this data. I'm only going to look at these features
and based on these features, here's the output. So like I said, go and look for data that you
probably don't even think you need for right now. Just look at the data, like see what's
available. And then you'll know that, okay, when the time comes, oh, I have this data over here,
would that be useful? Or there is data over here, which is somewhat translatable to the
feature that I'm looking for. Let me see and add that. That's kind of how I would go about it.
We have lots of voting for yes, think like the business. And also I wanted to
point out Hubert's comment in the chat, which was that understanding of the domain knowledge is
super important. And people tend to just kind of skip that because of the deadline pressure
that they get, but understanding the data and the domain is absolutely invaluable.
Okay. Let's head over to Slido one more time and we only have 10 minutes left, but hopefully we
can get another question and then talk a little bit about career advice. So one that might be
quick to answer, we had an anonymous question that said, I've been told that I need to have
a portfolio and I need to have done a bunch of projects on GitHub to be a stronger job-seeking
candidate. How true is that? It is true to a certain extent, especially if you're in a tie
break situation. So I've interviewed for people to be part of my team or to be part of other
teams as well. That's my first thing that I look for is, do they have a GitHub profile?
And what kind of work they've done? I'd like to see what kind of changes they've made over
time, the comments that they do and stuff like that. But at the same time, it's more relevant
if you are very early in your career. And let's say you're looking for a job and for whatever
reason, you haven't been able to seek a job for six months. When you start on Jan 1st, let's say,
nobody thinks that they'll have to wait until June or July to find a job. They would hope that
they'd get a job sooner than later. But I just say, start on the side, building out projects
that you think you're interested, not to show somebody else that you can do X, Y, and Z.
But if it's a project that you think that you're genuinely interested, automatically you will go
very deep into that. And when you talk about that in your job interview, you will then tell
them how you thought through the problem, how you thought through the solutions, how you thought
through the system design, if there is a system designed to that, how you thought through the
scale of problem, how you thought through the lack of data, if it's data that's
publicly available, and how did you get that data? How did you transform that data?
All of those things will automatically happen. So even if it's just one project, the depth of
the project is sufficient. And then you'll anyways have, depending on the team that you're
interviewing with, the code that you work with, they'll ask you to write your code. So it's not
a given that if you have a GitHub profile, they'll wave off the code interview part or something of
that sort. You'll have a few more downy points here and there. But the way I look at interviewees
is how they are able to think, especially in this day and age when you have coding agents
and the need to be an exceptionally good coder is kind of reduced. It's all about the way you
think about a solution and the way you come up with the solutions. Have you been able to put
out a dashboard of sorts? And all of those things do matter. So think about it that way and build
up a site as well. Fantastic. Okay. Well, seven minutes left. So maybe we can get in
our last question that we like to ask, which is career advice. There's been a ton of career
advice already in our call, but Prajesh, are there some things that you would share with people
who are sort of like lower down the ladder than you or your peers? Like
what helped you in your career? What would you share with others?
Like I said, when Logan was asking, don't put yourself in a local minimum. If that's what you
want to do and you're happy in that space, that's fine. There's nothing wrong with that. There is no
right or wrong things here. But if you are a curious person, if you want to grow up the ladder,
even don't just put yourself in a local minimum. I have a bunch that I've kind of wanted to get
into, but none of them are related to go to this particular website, this particular YouTube
channel, or listen to this podcast and whatever. I think the first thing that you need to develop
is perspective as a data scientist or a machine learning engineer or whatever. It's about
developing new perspectives. You will have to spend your time and actively curate what perspectives
that you develop and how that translates to what you do in your job. I very consciously built
myself into thinking like a data scientist. I was a researcher, so I used to think like a
researcher. And then I quickly realized that just thinking like that wouldn't help because there are
deadlines to reach. There are so many other things, not every job, not every problem is a research
problem. So you'll start having to think about what is the simplest way I can get to the solution.
If there is a simple way, do I even need to go and think about a more complex machine learning
solution? Take it to the business. If the business is happy with that, okay, so be it.
But then you kind of get a buy-in because I think a lot of people's issues are we are not really
given enough time to implement X, Y, and Z. Initially, you will never be given enough time,
but then you get a buy-in after producing some results and then tell them, hey, usually this is
not a good thing for X, Y, and Z reasons. You have to do all of these things, which usually takes
three months instead of the two or one month that you asked for. And so you're kind of
buying more territory based on how you go about it. And for that, you need to know
the different verticals and the different horizontals and how they work. If somebody
says scale up, I want you to be able to do this for a million documents. You have to make them
understand that from a DevOps perspective, it's not just random scale up. It comes with certain
costs. You won't be expected to see the same amount of time and accuracy because of certain
things that you would probably see something in a thousand documents versus a million documents.
And it changes the way systems are interconnected. It could potentially induce more failures. It
would potentially induce more missed documents or whatever. So you'll have to talk to them about it.
Usually many people in the business are willing to listen to your things, but at the same time,
keep it somewhat technical. So you have to learn to speak like the business and explain in English
rather than going too technical about X, Y, and Z, which they may or may not necessarily fully
understand. So go vertical and go horizontal at the same time if you want to really be
exceptionally good at your job. That's my long and short of career advice. But outside of that,
I have a few that I'd like to go through. First and foremost, be kind. That's the first thing
that you should do. Be kind to people. And as a data scientist or a machine learning engineer,
you have to train yourself to be unbiased. What that means to say is you have to
stop thinking of this works. I know I have so much experience, blah, blah, blah. Put all of
that aside when you get into a meeting with someone. Hear them out. Don't talk over them
and hear them out and understand what they're trying to say. Many times when we go and sit
with the business is we try and get the requirements. The getting the requirements
part is more like the business says these nine things are my requirements. Am I delivering on
that? No. There's a lot of in between the lines. So try and understand what the business really
wants. Sometimes the business doesn't really know what they want. So try and talk to them about it.
Try and work through that thing. And then you can then get a better business requirements.
And then when you work with your business analyst or whoever is writing the business requirements,
you can say, Hey, this is probably not going to be done in this phase because of these reasons,
but we can do an approximation of this. So on and so forth. So it just depends on how you
genuinely listen to people. If you're interested, be a mentor, becoming a mentor or becoming a
teacher changes the perspective altogether in the way you actually go about your own job.
Because then there's a difference between you understanding something and there's a difference
between you explaining something. And then like Feynman or Einstein, either of them said,
if you're not able to explain something adequately, you haven't understood it well enough.
So being a mentor to somebody who's a junior or not as much experience as you are always helps.
And they bring in new perspectives that you probably never would have thought of.
So that's something that you would have to definitely look into. And I think this is
extremely important for data scientists, develop rapport with people and get them to invite you
into meetings that you have no business being in. Just sit there and listen to what they are
discussing, especially if it is business related, because you will then understand why business is
asking for something rather than what they're specifically asking for. So just go there.
I used to do this. I used to just say, Hey, can I just join here? And then I just, I used to sit
there. I used to say, I used to say, can I be a fly in the wall? And they'd be like, okay,
CC Brijesh. And I just go and listen. And I developed so many perspectives. That's kind
of how I developed my know-how of some of the domain knowledge. Otherwise you won't get that
domain knowledge. You will then hear more problems in the business than you think, Oh, you know what?
I can actually solve for this. That gives you some more acceptance and buy-in as well in the
company that you are working for. Fantastic. Well, we have hit the top of the hour.
So I have to jump in and stop you Brijesh, but please follow Brijesh on LinkedIn,
where I think he might share more of this wisdom. We thank you for hanging out with us. I cannot
wait to see you on Tuesday at the Data Science Lab where Hadley Wickham is going to be live coding
the week's TidyTuesday dataset. And by the way, the TidyTuesday dataset for next week has not
been set yet. So if you would like to submit an unhinged dataset for TidyTuesday for Hadley to
live code, you can do that today. I think that the deadline is today. John Harmon,
who does TidyTuesday, is going to choose the dataset tonight. So hop on that. Go check out
the Call for Talks for PositConf 2026. And thank you so much for hanging out with us,
Brijesh. This was wonderful. I had such a good time. Thank you, everybody.